*
"THE ATMOSPHERE...
"THE BIOSPHERE...
"THE LITHOSPHERE...
...HAVE THINGS CYCLING
THROUGH THE SPHERES."
"THERE'S THE
ROCK CYCLE..."
"HYDROLOGICAL CYCLE..."
IT'S THE RECYCLING
OF ELEMENTS -
THAT IS WHAT WE
CALL "GEOCYCLES".
GEOCYCLES ARE THE
PROCESSES ON EARTH
THAT MOVE AND
RECYCLE MATTER.
THE EARTH IS A
DRAMATIC PLACE.
AND WHILE IT CONTINUES
TO CHANGE AND EVOLVE,
IT HAS PROCESSES WHICH KEEP
OUR PLANET IN BALANCE.
GLOBAL STUDIES USE NEW AND
EXPANDING TECHNOLOGIES
TO BETTER UNDERSTAND
HOW THE EARTH WORKS.
MODERN EARTH SCIENCE LOOKS
AT THE EARTH AS A SYSTEM.
BUT WITHIN THE
EARTH'S SYSTEM WE HAVE
A WHOLE LOT
OF SUBSYSTEMS.
WHEN WE LOOK
AT THE EARTH,
WE SEE FOUR
FUNDAMENTAL SYSTEMS.
WE SEE THE HYDROSPHERE
WHICH IS ALL THE WATER
ON THE PLANET; WE SEE
THE LITHOSPHERE WHICH IS
THE ROCKY OUTER SHELL OF
THE EARTH; WE SEE THE
BIOSPHERE WHICH IS ALL
LIVING MATTER ON THE
PLANET; AND WE SEE THE
ATMOSPHERE WHICH IS THIS
DELICATE THIN ENVELOPE OF
GAS THAT PROTECTS US FROM
ALL SORTS OF NASTY
THINGS FROM OUTER SPACE
AND CONTAINS THAT PLEASANT
GAS CALLED "OXYGEN"
WHICH ALLOWS US TO
LIVE AND BREATHE.
THE IMPORTANT THING TO
NOTE ABOUT EACH OF
THESE SYSTEMS IS THEY
ALL WORK TOGETHER.
NO ONE SYSTEM
WORKS IN ISOLATION.
THESE SYSTEMS
WORK TOGETHER TO
RECYCLE EARTH'S PRECIOUS
MATTER AND ELEMENTS
LIKE WATER,
ROCKS, AND CARBON.
THE CARBON CYCLE IS A
REALLY GOOD EXAMPLE OF
CARBON BEING CYCLED
THROUGH THE SPHERES.
CARBON IS THE FOURTH
MOST ABUNDANT ELEMENT
IN THE UNIVERSE
AND IS CONSIDERED
THE BUILDING
BLOCK OF LIFE.
THE CARBON CYCLE IS VERY
COMPLEX, AND THERE ARE
MANY WAYS IT CAN CYCLE
BETWEEN ALL THE SPHERES.
BUT THERE ARE TWO
MAJOR CATEGORIES:
THE SHORT TERM AND THE
LONG TERM CARBON CYCLE.
THE SHORT TERM, OR
BIOLOGICAL CARBON CYCLE,
OCCURS OVER PERIODS OF
DAYS TO THOUSANDS OF YEARS
AND IS ALSO CALLED THE
BIOLOGICAL CARBON CYCLE
BECAUSE BIOLOGY PLAYS AN
IMPORTANT ROLE OF CARBON
MOVING BETWEEN LAND,
OCEAN, AND ATMOSPHERE
THROUGH PROCESSES SUCH
AS PHOTOSYNTHESIS.
THE SHORT TERM CARBON CYCLE
REALLY IS CARBON BEING
TAKEN UP BY PLANTS IN THE
PROCESS OF THEIR LIVING -
BASICALLY SOMETHING
CALLED "PHOTOSYNTHESIS".
CARBON IN THE PRESENCE
OF WATER AND SUNLIGHT
IS GOBBLED UP BY PLANTS,
AND PLANTS HAVE THE
GRACIOUS QUALITY
OF PRODUCING OXYGEN
AND OF PROCESSING
SUGARS.
SO, CARBON IS TAKEN UP
BY PLANTS AND, IN TURN,
PLANTS ARE EATEN BY
ANIMALS WHICH THEN DIE
AND WHEN THEY DECOMPOSE
THEY CAN LIBERATE
THOSE ELEMENTS BACK
TO THE PLANET.
THE LONG TERM, OR
GEOLOGICAL CARBON CYCLE,
OCCURS OVER PERIODS
OF MILLIONS OF YEARS.
IN THE LONG TERM CARBON
CAN BE CONSUMED BY PLANTS
IN PARTICULAR AND THOSE
PLANTS CAN THEN BE BURIED
FOR MILLIONS OF YEARS.
THAT PRODUCES VERY
VALUABLE THINGS LIKE OIL
AND NATURAL GAS AND
LIBERATING THAT CARBON
AGAIN, IN A TOTALLY
DIFFERENT FORM.
WHEN OIL AND NATURAL GAS
ARE BURNED FOR ENERGY,
CARBON IS RELEASED BACK
INTO THE ATMOSPHERE.
BUT THE BALANCE OF CARBON
ON EARTH IS IN DANGER
OF BEING DISRUPTED.
WE ARE CUTTING DOWN MORE
AND MORE TREES, DECREASING
ORGANISMS THAT ABSORB
AND USE THE CARBON.
WE ARE ALSO A SOURCE OF
EXTRA CARBON BECAUSE WE'RE
BURNING FOSSIL FUELS AND
WE ARE INPUTTING EXTRA
AMOUNTS OF CARBON INTO
THE ATMOSPHERE WHICH,
COMBINED WITH OXYGEN,
FORMS THIS CARBON DIOXIDE
THAT IS IN THE NEWS AND
EVERYBODY'S TALKING ABOUT.
CARBON DIOXIDE IS
AN IMPORTANT GAS
IN OUR ATMOSPHERE.
BUT SCIENTISTS WORRY
AN INCREASE OF CO2'S
IN THE ATMOSPHERE COULD
CAUSE EXTREME CHANGES
ON THE EARTH, LIKE CHANGING
SEA LEVELS, TEMPERATURES,
AND WEATHER PATTERNS.
THE HYDROLOGIC CYCLE
IS PROBABLY EARTH'S
MOST IMPORTANT CYCLE.
AND WHAT IT IS, IS HOW
FRESH WATER CYCLES
THROUGH THE EARTH
AND THE ATMOSPHERE.
OUR CIVILIZATION IS
ENTIRELY DEPENDENT
ON SOURCES
OF FRESH WATER.
FRESH WATER FOR
DRINKING WATER,
FRESH WATER FOR AGRICULTURE
AND, INCREASINGLY,
WATER FOR A WIDE VARIETY
OF INDUSTRIAL USES.
OFTEN CALLED THE "WATER
PLANET", EARTH IS COVERED
WITH THIS PRECIOUS
RESOURCE IN OCEANS,
THE AIR, THE SOIL, BUT MOST
OF IT IS NOT FRESH WATER.
IF YOU LOOK AT
THE WORLD'S WATER,
MOST OF IT'S SALT WATER.
ABOUT 97% OF ALL THE WATER
ON THE PLANET EARTH IS
SALT WATER AND NOT
READILY AVAILABLE
FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION
OR INDUSTRIAL USE.
THAT 3% OF FRESH WATER
ON THE PLANET EARTH,
MOST OF THAT'S TAKEN UP
IN GLACIAL ICE - ABOUT 2%.
THAT LEAVES US
ABOUT A PERCENT
OF USEABLE FRESH WATER.
OF THAT USEABLE FRESH
WATER, MOST OF THAT -
ABOUT 90% OF THAT
- IS GROUND WATER.
HOW WE GET THE IMPORTANT
GROUND WATER WE NEED
IS THROUGH THE
HYDROLOGIC CYCLE.
THE WATER ON EARTH IS
ESSENTIALLY CONSTANTLY
BEING RECYCLED.
YOU'VE GOT WATER
EVAPORATING FROM THE OCEANS
AND CURRENTLY A LOT FROM
THE DIFFERENT ICE CAPS.
YOU'VE GOT A LOT OF THE
WATER DRAINING FROM ICE
TO WATER THAT GETS MOVED
UP INTO THE ATMOSPHERE
WHERE IT'S MOVED
AROUND, YOU KNOW,
IT FORMS CLOUDS
AND WE GET RAIN.
THAT WATER
EVENTUALLY
- WHEN IT FALLS
ON LAND, ANYWAY -
EITHER FLOWS BACK TO
THE OCEAN AND RECYCLES
ITSELF THAT WAY OR GOES
INTO THE UNDERGROUND
AND BECOMES, YOU
KNOW, GROUND WATER -
A VERY APT NAME FOR IT
- WHERE IT STILL MOVES.
ONCE IT GETS UNDERGROUND
IT DOESN'T JUST STAY STILL.
IT'S STILL GUIDED BY
THE FORCES OF GRAVITY,
SO WILL SLOWLY WORK ITS
WAY DOWN AND ACTUALLY
SLOWLY MOVE EITHER TO
SPRINGS OR PLACES WHERE
IT FEEDS INTO RIVERS
AND STUFF LIKE THAT.
SOMETIMES THE GROUND WATER
IS CAUGHT IN THE WATER TABLE
- THE UPPER LIMIT OF
THE GROUND WATER
WHERE WE CAN
DRILL FOR IT.
IN THE WINTER YOU'VE
GOT ALL THESE ICICLES
SEEMING TO SPRING
RIGHT OUT OF THE ROCK.
WHAT YOU'RE ACTUALLY
LOOKING AT IS YOU'VE CUT
THROUGH THE PATH TO THE
WATER TABLE OF RAIN WATER.
THE WATER IS OBVIOUSLY
AFFECTED BY GRAVITY,
BUT WHEN WE CUT THROUGH
IT OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT,
WE INTERRUPT
THAT PATHWAY.
SO INSTEAD OF SLOWLY
FLOWING THROUGH THE ROCK,
IT NOW COMES OUT IN THE AIR
AND MOVES THROUGH THE AIR.
AND A LOT OF PLACES
WHERE YOU SEE THESE
SEEPS AND SPRINGS,
THAT'S THAT GROUND WATER
MOVING OUT ONTO
THE SURFACE.
DUE TO FORCES OF GRAVITY,
IF WE DO NOT INTERRUPT
THE FLOW OF GROUND
WATER, IT WILL FLOW INTO
RIVERS AND OCEANS
EVENTUALLY EVAPORATING
AND START THE CYCLE
ALL OVER AGAIN.
ROCKS ARE ALWAYS BEING
CREATED AND DESTROYED
IN WHAT WE CALL
THE ROCK CYCLE.
SO, BECAUSE WE HAVE PLATE
TECTONICS AND WE HAVE THE
EARTH'S SURFACE CONSTANTLY
BEING RENEWED, WE'RE ALSO
FORMING AND DESTROYING
ROCKS ALL THE TIME.
BECAUSE ROCKS ARE
CONSTANTLY BEING RECYCLED,
THERE IS NO TRUE BEGINNING
OR END TO THE ROCK CYCLE.
BUT WE CAN ARBITRARILY
START WITH AN IGNEOUS ROCK,
FORMED FROM MOLTEN
LIQUID MINERALS
DEEP WITHIN THE EARTH.
MOLTEN MAGMA FROM THE EARTH
COOLS BENEATH THE SURFACE
AND IT FORMS CRYSTALLINE
IGNEOUS ROCK -
LIKE A GRANITE,
FOR INSTANCE.
IF WE UPLIFTED IGNEOUS ROCK
ONTO THE EARTH'S SURFACE
THROUGH A PLATE TECTONIC
PROCESS, THAT ROCK WILL
EVENTUALLY BE BROKEN
DOWN INTO WHAT'S CALLED
"DETRITUS", MORE COMMONLY
KNOWN AS SEDIMENT.
THAT MATERIAL WILL
THEN BE TRANSPORTED,
USUALLY BY WATER, BUT
ALSO WIND AND ICE
ARE VERY EFFICIENT
TRANSPORT MEDIUMS
THAT CAN MOVE
SEDIMENT ABOUT.
IF THAT SEDIMENT IS
COMPACTED AND CEMENTED
TOGETHER, WE'VE MADE
A SEDIMENTARY ROCK.
WE'VE TAKEN AN IGNEOUS
ROCK THAT'S ON THE SURFACE
OF THE EARTH AND WE'VE
MADE A SEDIMENTARY ROCK.
SEDIMENTARY ROCK IS
THEN USUALLY COMPACTED
BY THE WEIGHT OF
OVERLYING LAYERS.
IT'S LAYER UPON LAYER UPON
LAYER OF SEDIMENT AND IT'S
GETTING VERY, VERY - MORE
PRESSURE, MORE TEMPERATURE.
THOSE PRESSURES AND
TEMPERATURES EVENTUALLY,
DEEP IN THE EARTH, CAUSE
THE ROCK TO CHANGE AGAIN.
IT CAUSES THE CHEMISTRY TO
WANT TO REARRANGE ITSELF
TO ACCOMMODATE TO THOSE
PRESSURES AND TEMPERATURES.
SO, THAT PROCESS IS
CALLED "METAMORPHISM".
METAMORPHISM
MEANS "CHANGE FORM",
AND METAMORPHIC ROCKS
ARE PRODUCED FROM
PRE-EXISTING ROCKS -
SEDIMENTARY, IGNEOUS,
OR EVEN OTHER
METAMORPHIC ROCKS.
AND IF WE TAKE THAT
METAMORPHIC ROCK,
NOW WE'VE ALMOST COME
FULL CYCLE, IF WE TAKE THAT
METAMORPHIC ROCK AND
SUBJECT IT TO ENOUGH HEAT
TO WHERE IT MELTS AND THEN
WE TAKE THAT MOLTEN ROCK -
SOMETHING CALLED "MAGMA"
- AND WE LET IT COOL AND
CRYSTALLIZE, WE'RE RIGHT
BACK WHERE WE STARTED WITH
OUR IGNEOUS ROCK AND WE'VE
COMPLETED THE ROCK CYCLE.
EARTH'S SURFACE IS
CONSTANTLY CHANGING.
ROCKS CAN BE TRANSFORMED AND
TRANSFERRED TO NEW LOCATIONS
DUE TO FORCES OF NATURE
SUCH AS WIND AND WATER,
SOMETIMES CREATING DRAMATIC
AND MAJESTIC SCENERY.
EARTH'S MATERIALS ARE
BROKEN DOWN AND MOVED
DUE TO SURFACE PROCESSES
SUCH AS WEATHERING,
MASS WASTING,
AND EROSION.
WEATHERING IS THE SURFACE
PROCESS THAT BREAKS DOWN
OR ALTERS ROCKS AT
OR NEAR THE SURFACE.
THERE ARE TWO PRIMARY
TYPES OF WEATHERING.
THERE'S MECHANICAL
WEATHERING AND THERE'S
CHEMICAL WEATHERING.
MECHANICAL, SOMETIMES CALLED
"PHYSICAL" WEATHERING,
RESULTS WHEN A ROCK
IS MECHANICALLY
OR PHYSICALLY
BUSTED APART.
AN EXAMPLE OF THIS WOULD BE
A TREE ROOT THAT WOULD GROW
UP IN A CRACK OF A ROCK
AND SPLIT THE ROCK IN TWO.
IN WINTER WHEN THERE'S
LOTS OF ICE, ICE TENDS TO
GET INTO CRACKS AND
BREAK APART ROCKS.
WATER BREAKS DOWN
ROCKS REALLY WELL
BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY
THERE'S A LOT OF IT
AND IT CAN PRODUCE
A GREAT FORCE.
WATER IS ALSO AN
IMPORTANT FACTOR
IN CHEMICAL WEATHERING.
CHEMICAL WEATHERING IS A
REACTION TYPICALLY WITH
ACIDIC RAIN WATER OR
ACIDIC GROUND WATER
OR THE OXYGEN IN THE
ATMOSPHERE THAT WILL
CHEMICALLY ALTER
AND CHANGE THE ROCK.
USUALLY WHAT CHEMICAL
WEATHERING WILL DO
WILL BEGIN TO BREAK
THE ROCK DOWN,
IT WILL BEGIN TO
DISINTEGRATE THE ROCK.
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL
WEATHERING WILL WORK
IN TANDEM AND
THEY'LL OFTEN WORK
VERY EFFICIENTLY TOGETHER
BECAUSE PHYSICAL WEATHERING
TAKES THE ROCK AND
MAKES A BIG ROCK INTO
A BUNCH OF LITTLE SMALL
ROCKS THAT IS MUCH MORE
SUSCEPTIBLE NOW TO
CHEMICAL WEATHERING.
SO CHEMICAL WEATHERING
AND MECHANICAL OR PHYSICAL
WEATHERING WORK TOGETHER
TO DISINTEGRATE ROCKS.
CHEMICAL WEATHERING IS
MUCH MORE PRONOUNCED
IN HUMID CLIMATES WHERE
MECHANICAL WEATHERING
IS MORE PRONOUNCED
IN ARID CLIMATES.
CLIMATE FACTORS SUCH AS
TEMPERATURE AND MOISTURE
AFFECT THE BREAKDOWN OF
ROCK AND THUS THE TYPE
OF SOIL YOU WILL
FIND IN A REGION.
SOIL IS ONE OF THE MAJOR
PRODUCTS OF WEATHERING.
IT IS ESSENTIALLY THE
COMBINATION OF PARTICLES
OF ROCK, MINERALS,
AND ORGANIC MATERIAL
PRODUCED THROUGH THE
WEATHERING PROCESS
THAT CONTAINS THE NUTRIENTS
NECESSARY TO SUPPORT
THE VARIOUS FORMS OF
PLANT LIFE ON THE PLANET.
IT'S VERY TRUE.
CLIMATE CAN HAVE
A DRAMATIC EFFECT
ON THE KINDS OF
SOILS THAT FORM.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN A DESERT WE
DON'T GET A LOT OF RAINFALL.
WE ONLY GET MAYBE SIX OR
SEVEN INCHES OF RAIN A YEAR.
AND SO THE AMOUNT OF
CHEMICAL WEATHERING WE GET
IN A DESERT IS NOT A WHOLE
LOT AND THAT MEANS THAT
WE'LL GET CERTAIN KINDS
OF FEATURES FORMING IN
THE SOIL, OR PROPERTIES
OF THE SOIL THAT REFLECT
THE LIMITED RAINFALL WE
GET IN A DESERT AREA.
BUT IN AN AREA LIKE
AMAZONIA WHERE YOU GET
100 INCHES OF RAIN
OR MORE, THE SOILS
BECOME VERY STRONGLY
CHEMICALLY WEATHERED
OVER THOUSANDS
OF YEARS.
AND THE SOILS WE SEE
IN THAT AREA THEN ARE
VERY DIFFERENT FROM THE
SOILS WE SEE IN A DESERT.
AND IN THAT PARTICULAR
CASE, THE DIFFERENCES IN
THOSE SOILS MOSTLY REFLECT
DIFFERENCES IN CLIMATE
WHICH ARE, OF COURSE,
DIRECTLY RELATED
TO DIFFERENCES
IN THE BIOTA
ASSOCIATED WITH
THOSE SOILS.
SO IT'S VERY TRUE THAT
CLIMATE, VEGETATION,
TOPOGRAPHY OR GEOGRAPHY
HAS A DRAMATIC EFFECT
ON THE TYPES OF
SOILS WE SEE.
SOILS ARE ANOTHER ONE OF
EARTH'S PRECIOUS RESOURCES.
BECAUSE OF SOIL WE CAN GROW
CORN, COTTON, OR APPLES,
DEPENDING ON THE CLIMATE
AND NUTRIENTS IN THE SOIL.
MASS WASTING REFERS TO THE
MOVEMENT OF ROCK OR SOIL
UNDER THE INFLUENCE
OF GRAVITY.
MASS WASTING IS A FORM OF
EROSION, OR FORM OF THESE
BREAKDOWN PROCESSES WHERE
THERE'S LARGE CATASTROPHIC
LANDSLIDES OR ROCKSLIDES.
THAT'S USUALLY WHAT IS
REFERRED TO AS MASS WASTING.
THINGS LIKE MUDSLIDES
WHICH ARE MAJOR GEOLOGIC
FORCES THAT ACTUALLY
CHANGE THE LANDSCAPE,
AND OBVIOUSLY
THINGS LIKE FLOODS.
HISTORICALLY, THE
MISSISSIPPI RIVER HAS EVEN
CHANGED ITS COURSE
MULTIPLE TIMES BEFORE WE
KIND OF "ENGINEERED" IT
INTO ITS CURRENT PATH.
BUT THAT'S A RESULT OF
FAIRLY REGULAR FLOODS
- YOUR 500 YEAR,
YOUR 1000 YEAR FLOODS -
WHICH HERE YOU'RE
STARTING TO GET INTO
A HUMAN TIME FRAME
WHERE THE PATHS OF
EVEN SOME OF THESE LARGE
RIVERS HAVE MOVED.
MASS WASTING CAN CHANGE
THE LANDSCAPE VERY QUICKLY,
BUT OTHER PROCESSES
LIKE EROSION CAN HAPPEN
VERY SLOWLY AND CAN
PRODUCE AMAZING SIGHTS.
MOST OF THESE GRAND
GEOLOGIC STRUCTURES
THAT WE SEE AND GO ON
FAMILY VACATIONS TO
ARE THE RESULT OF REALLY
LONG TERM EROSION.
PLACES LIKE THE GRAND
CANYON, THAT WAS FORMED
ENTIRELY FROM EROSIVE
PROCESSES FROM MASSIVE
RIVERS AND SEASONAL
FLOODING THAT JUST
CONTINUALLY WORE AWAY
AT SPECIFIC PARTS
AND REVEALED THESE
HUGE ROCK LAYERS.
EROSION HAPPENS WHEN
WATER AND WIND AND ICE
CARRY AWAY PARTICLES
OF ROCK AND SOIL,
CARVING AND SHAPING
THE LANDSCAPE.
YOU'VE GOT RAIN...
GLACIERS ARE A VERY
BIG EARTH-MOVING FORCE.
GLACIERS ARE PART OF
THE HYDROLOGICAL CYCLE
AND THE ROCK CYCLE AND
ARE BASICALLY THICK ICE
THAT FORMS OVER HUNDREDS
OR THOUSANDS OF YEARS.
THERE ARE TWO BASIC
KINDS OF GLACIERS:
ALPINE AND CONTINENTAL.
CONTINENTAL GLACIERS
COVER THOUSANDS OR
TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF SQUARE MILES.
FOR EXAMPLE,
GREENLAND IS ALMOST
ENTIRELY COVERED IN ICE.
THAT WOULD BE A GOOD
MODERN-DAY EXAMPLE OF
A CONTINENTAL GLACIER
BECAUSE IT COVERS
THE ENTIRE CONTINENT.
CONTINENTAL GLACIERS ARE
EXTREMELY THICK AND CAN
LITERALLY SCOUR
THE LANDSCAPE FLAT.
AS THEY'RE MOVING FORWARD,
AS THEY'RE GROWING,
THEY'RE BASICALLY SCRAPING
UP EVERYTHING IN THEIR WAKE.
SO THEY'RE PICKING UP
ROCKS, YOU KNOW, THEY'RE
CARVING GROOVES INTO THE
ROCK AND PICKING UP DIRT.
AND AS THEY'RE LEAVING,
AS THEY'RE RECEDING,
THEY'RE LEAVING
THAT STUFF BEHIND.
THEY'RE DUMPING OUT
EVERYTHING THEY'VE
PICKED UP ON THE WAY.
THE NORTHERN PART
OF NORTH AMERICA,
IF YOU LOOK AT THE
LANDSCAPE IN THE MIDWEST
AND PLACES AROUND
THE GREAT LAKES
YOU NOTICE AREAS THAT
ARE EXTREMELY FLAT.
THEY'RE FLAT AND THEY'VE
BEEN GROUND DOWN TO BEDROCK
AND THE REASON THAT IS
IS WE'VE HAD CONTINENTAL
GLACIERS BASICALLY SCOUR
AWAY MUCH OF NORTH AMERICA.
ALPINE GLACIERS WHICH
YOU FIND IN THE ALPS,
FOR EXAMPLE, IN EUROPE,
OR EVEN IN PARTS
OF THE SIERRA
NEVADA IN CALIFORNIA -
THESE ARE GLACIERS
THAT ARE MUCH SMALLER
AND FORM IN HIGH
MOUNTAINOUS REGIONS
AND PRODUCE VERY DRAMATIC
TOPOGRAPHIC FEATURES,
LIKE THE MATTERHORN IS
AN EXAMPLE OF A FEATURE
THAT'S BEEN CARVED OUT
BY ALPINE GLACIAL ICE.
THE RUGGED PEAKS, THE
GRANDEST OF CANYONS,
THE BEAUTIFUL AND UNUSUAL
LANDSCAPES - ALL RESULTS
OF THE WATER AND AIR AND
WIND AND OTHER PROCESSES
THAT HAVE SCULPTED
THE VARIOUS TERRAINS
OVER MILLIONS AND
MILLIONS OF YEARS.
THE EFFECT THEY HAVE
ON OVERALL TERRAINS
CANNOT BE SEEN ON
THE SHORT TERM,
YOU HAVE TO WAIT
VERY LONG TERM.
OFTEN THEY'RE HAPPENING
BELOW US AS WE SPEAK.
WE CAN'T SEE WHAT'S
HAPPENING UNDER OUR FEET,
BUT THESE SAME PROCESSES
ARE CONTINUOUSLY GOING ON
AND EVENTUALLY, MILLIONS
OF YEARS FROM NOW,
WHEN THE SURFACE HAS BEEN
ERODED, WHEN WATER AND AIR
HAVE PUSHED ASIDE
EVERYTHING THAT'S HERE
AND DEPOSITED IT
SOMEWHERE ELSE,
THE THINGS THAT WE'RE
NOW TALKING ABOUT
WILL HAVE COME TO THE
SURFACE AND REPLACED IT
AND WE'LL SEE THE
RESULTS OF THOSE FORCES.
THE RESULTS OF THE FORCES
AND PROCESSES ON EARTH
HAVE AND WILL CONTINUE
TO SHAPE OUR PLANET.
*